doc: posix: structural reorganization of posix docs (#64540)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/services/portability/posix/overview/index.rst

.. _posix_overview:

Overview
########

> The Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) is a family of standards specified by the `IEEE Computer Society`_ for maintaining compatibility between operating systems. Zephyr

Author: Fixed!

implements a subset of the standard POSIX API specified by `IEEE 1003.1-2017`_ (also known as POSIX-1.2017).

..  figure:: posix.svg
    :align: center
    :alt: POSIX Support in Zephyr

    POSIX support in Zephyr

.. note::
    This page does not document Zephyr's :ref:`POSIX architecture<Posix arch>`, which is used to

>     runn Zephyr as a native application under the host operating system for prototyping,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    run Zephyr as a native application under the host operating system for prototyping,
```

    test, and diagnostic purposes.

> With the POSIX support available in Zephyr, an existing POSIX conformant

Author: I would like to avoid modifying existing content if possible, and was hoping to focus mainly on structure. That's mainly because @kartben wanted a refresh of the posix docs for v3.5.0. The changes in this PR should be able to be backported.

https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/26f30db8adabe40983ca2501e1c866dc7ebe2d5c/doc/services/portability/posix.rst?plain=1#L11

Zephyr features and functionality. Additionally, a library designed to be
POSIX conformant can be ported to Zephyr kernel based applications with no changes.

The POSIX API is an increasingly popular OSAL (operating system abstraction layer) for IoT and
embedded applications, as can be seen in Zephyr, AWS:FreeRTOS, TI-RTOS, and NuttX.

Benefits of POSIX support in Zephyr include:

- Offering a familiar API to non-embedded programmers, especially from Linux
- Enabling reuse (portability) of existing libraries based on POSIX APIs
- Providing an efficient API subset appropriate for small (MCU) embedded systems

.. _posix_subprofiles:

POSIX Subprofiles
=================

While Zephyr supports running multiple `threads <threads_v2>`_ (possibly in an `SMP <smp_arch>`_
configuration), as well as `Virtual Memory and MMUs <x86_developer_guide>`_, Zephyr code and data
normally share a common address space. The Zephyr kernel executable code and the application
executable code are typically compiled into the same binary artifact. From that perspective, Zephyr
apps can be seen as running in the context of a single process.

> Multi-purpose operating systems (OS) such as Linux, \*BSD, and macOS offer full POSIX conformance.

Author: Fixed!

have limited hardware resources, and experience limited user interaction. In such systems, full
POSIX conformance can be impractical and unnecessary.

For that reason, POSIX defined the following :ref:`Application Environment Profiles (AEP)<posix_aep>`
as part of `IEEE 1003.13-2003`_ (also known as POSIX.13-2003).

* Minimal Realtime System Profile (:ref:`PSE51 <posix_aep_pse51>`)
* Realtime Controller System Profile (:ref:`PSE52 <posix_aep_pse52>`)
* Dedicated Realtime System Profile (:ref:`PSE53 <posix_aep_pse53>`)
* Multi-Purpose Realtime System (PSE54)

POSIX.13-2003 AEP were formalized in 2003 via "Units of Functionality" but the specification is now
inactive (for reference only). Nevertheless, the intent is still captured as part of POSIX-1.2017
via :ref:`Options<posix_options>` and :ref:`Option Groups<posix_option_groups>`, in Appendix E.

.. _posix_apps:

POSIX Applications in Zephyr
============================

A POSIX app in Zephyr is :ref:`built like any other app<application>`; it requires the usual
`prj.conf` and `CMakeLists.txt`, and then it is :ref:`built the usual way<samples-and-demos>`.

.. code-block:: kconfig

   CONFIG_POSIX_API=y

> .. code-block:: c

Author: Fixed! I'm not sure what you mean by out of context though. It's under the "POSIX Applications in Zephyr" section, which seems like the right context.

> .. code-block:: c

Reviewer 2: The caption already gives some understanding of what this code is about.

   #include <stddef.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <time.h>

   void megasleep(size_t megaseconds)
   {
      struct timespec ts = {
         .tv_sec = megaseconds * 1000000,
         .tv_nsec = 0,
      };

      printf("See you in a while!\n");
      if (nanosleep(&ts, NULL) == -1) {
         perror("nanosleep");
      }
   }

   int main()
   {
      megasleep(42);
      return 0;
   }

..
    TODO: insert a link to a list of all samples tagged with 'posix'

.. _posix_config:

Configuration
=============

Like all features in Zephyr, POSIX features are configurable but

> :ref:`disabled by default<introducing_zephyr>`. System designers must explicitly choose to enable

Author: Fixed!

    POSIX support in Zephyr

.. note::
    This page does not document Zephyr's :ref:`POSIX architecture<Posix arch>`, which is used to
    run Zephyr as a native application under the host operating system for prototyping,
    test, and diagnostic purposes.

With the POSIX support available in Zephyr, an existing POSIX conformant
application can be ported to run on the Zephyr kernel, and therefore leverage
Zephyr features and functionality. Additionally, a library designed to be
POSIX conformant can be ported to Zephyr kernel based applications with no changes.

The POSIX API is an increasingly popular OSAL (operating system abstraction layer) for IoT and
embedded applications, as can be seen in Zephyr, AWS:FreeRTOS, TI-RTOS, and NuttX.

Benefits of POSIX support in Zephyr include:

- Offering a familiar API to non-embedded programmers, especially from Linux
- Enabling reuse (portability) of existing libraries based on POSIX APIs
- Providing an efficient API subset appropriate for small (MCU) embedded systems

.. _posix_subprofiles:

POSIX Subprofiles
=================

While Zephyr supports running multiple `threads <threads_v2>`_ (possibly in an `SMP <smp_arch>`_

> configuration), as well as `Virtual Memory and MMUs <x86_developer_guide>`_, Zephyr code and data

Reviewer 3: Not so sure about linking to an x86 specific page? But not sure if there is a better option either (btw thanks very much for the effort in adding plenty of cross references!).
Would hardware/porting/arch.rst or kernel/usermode/memory_domain.rst be any better?

Author: Will take a look

Author: Hmm... so the memory management API exists
https://docs.zephyrproject.org/apidoc/latest/group__mm__drv__apis.html
but there is nothing other than API docs for it. I also suspect it isn't super widely used outside of Intel.

Author: Suggested adding a Virtual Memory item to docs in #64049.

apps can be seen as running in the context of a single process.

While multi-purpose operating systems (OS) offer full POSIX conformance, Real-Time Operating
Systems (RTOS) such as Zephyr typically serve a fixed-purpose, have limited hardware resources,
and experience limited user interaction. In such systems, full POSIX conformance can be
impractical and unnecessary.

For that reason, POSIX defined the following :ref:`Application Environment Profiles (AEP)<posix_aep>`
as part of `IEEE 1003.13-2003`_ (also known as POSIX.13-2003).

* Minimal Realtime System Profile (:ref:`PSE51 <posix_aep_pse51>`)
* Realtime Controller System Profile (:ref:`PSE52 <posix_aep_pse52>`)
* Dedicated Realtime System Profile (:ref:`PSE53 <posix_aep_pse53>`)
* Multi-Purpose Realtime System (PSE54)

POSIX.13-2003 AEP were formalized in 2003 via "Units of Functionality" but the specification is now
inactive (for reference only). Nevertheless, the intent is still captured as part of POSIX-1.2017
via :ref:`Options<posix_options>` and :ref:`Option Groups<posix_option_groups>`, in Appendix E.

.. _posix_apps:

POSIX Applications in Zephyr
============================

> A POSIX app in Zephyr is :ref:`built like any other app<application>`; it requires the usual
> `prj.conf` and `CMakeLists.txt`, and then it is :ref:`built the usual way<samples-and-demos>`.

Reviewer 3: i don't think the second reference makes sense (and it's redundant)
also a minor formatting change on files.

```suggestion
A POSIX app in Zephyr is :ref:`built like any other app<application>` and therefore requires the usual
:file:`prj.conf` and :file:`CMakeLists.txt` files.
```

Author: Fixed!

.. code-block:: kconfig
   :caption: `prj.conf` for a simple POSIX app in Zephyr

    CONFIG_POSIX_API=y

.. code-block:: c
   :caption: A simple app that uses Zephyr's POSIX API

    #include <stddef.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <time.h>

    void megasleep(size_t megaseconds)
    {
        struct timespec ts = {
            .tv_sec = megaseconds * 1000000,
            .tv_nsec = 0,
        };

        printf("See you in a while!\n");
        if (nanosleep(&ts, NULL) == -1) {
            perror("nanosleep");
        }
    }

    int main()
    {
        megasleep(42);
        return 0;
    }

..
    TODO: insert a link to a list of all samples tagged with 'posix'

.. _posix_config:

Configuration
=============

Like many features in Zephyr, POSIX features are configurable but

> :ref:`disabled by default<introducing_zephyr>`. Users must explicitly choose to enable POSIX

Author: I was really looking for a link explaining the philosophy of

* disabled by default
* optimize for size first

But yeah, I could add an anchor probably

options via :ref:`Kconfig<kconfig>` selection.

Alternatively, users may enable one of the Kconfig options below as a shortcut to enable multiple
:ref:`Option Groups<posix_option_groups>`.

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_POSIX_API`

Author: No actually. Eventually we will rework all POSIX Kconfig options to reflect the standard POSIX option groups and options.

The problem is that there are *many* standard POSIX Option Groups and Options. At the same time, we want to make it easy for users to select the right options based on the specification.

In order to "shortcut" the potentially painful process of selecting many separate options, the idea was to add new `CONFIG_POSIX_PSE51`, `CONFIG_POSIX_PSE52`, shortcut options.

Those "shortcut" Kconfig options would then *imply* the many other Kconfig options / POSIX Option Groups based on the spec.

Currently, the only "shortcut" option we have is `CONFIG_POSIX_API`, but that actually has zero significance for the actual spec (aside from maybe enabling *every* POSIX option group).

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_POSIX_API`

Author: It would be good to have a page that lists all possible POSIX Kconfig options (including those that are currently in net or whatnot).

Ideally that could be semi-automated, but I think that's a future problem.

Similarly, it would be good to automatically generate a doxygen stub for functions.

For this PR, I could list them statically.

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_POSIX_API`

Author: Fixed! (see Configuration Options)

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_POSIX_API`

Reviewer 3: Can you please adjust the wording "Alternatively, users may enable one of the Kconfig options below as a shortcut to enable multiple" (note the "optionS", plural), as it's quite confusing otherwise. Or if the idea is that "Eventually we will rework all POSIX ..." then maybe just drop this for now?

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_POSIX_API`

Author: Added `:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PTHREAD_IPC` to make it plural. The idea is to remove these non-standard shortcuts and later replace them with ones that are more standard, but try to keep the document structure consistent.

    POSIX support in Zephyr

.. note::
    This page does not document Zephyr's :ref:`POSIX architecture<Posix arch>`, which is used to
    run Zephyr as a native application under the host operating system for prototyping,
    test, and diagnostic purposes.

With the POSIX support available in Zephyr, an existing POSIX conformant
application can be ported to run on the Zephyr kernel, and therefore leverage
Zephyr features and functionality. Additionally, a library designed to be
POSIX conformant can be ported to Zephyr kernel based applications with no changes.

The POSIX API is an increasingly popular OSAL (operating system abstraction layer) for IoT and
embedded applications, as can be seen in Zephyr, AWS:FreeRTOS, TI-RTOS, and NuttX.

Benefits of POSIX support in Zephyr include:

- Offering a familiar API to non-embedded programmers, especially from Linux
- Enabling reuse (portability) of existing libraries based on POSIX APIs
- Providing an efficient API subset appropriate for small (MCU) embedded systems

.. _posix_subprofiles:

POSIX Subprofiles
=================

While Zephyr supports running multiple `threads <threads_v2>`_ (possibly in an `SMP <smp_arch>`_

> configuration), as well as `Virtual Memory and MMUs<memory_management_api>`_, Zephyr code and data

Reviewer 3: this breaks the doc build

```suggestion
configuration), as well as `Virtual Memory and MMUs <memory_management_api>`_, Zephyr code and data
```

Author: Oh weird - thanks for noticing. I was able to build fine locally.

Reviewer 3: Ya... feels like this might be a parsing bug/regression in Sphinx or docutils tbh

Author: Fixed!
